---
title: "Life of a Dad, Husband, and Hacker"
date: 2019-03-15T19:37:37+11:00
draft: false
---

So after years of procrastination, I've finally started a blog to get all of the
thoughts running through my head out into the world. Probably not the best idea,
but let's see how it goes anyway.

One of the things which I've been fairly cognisant of recently is how much time
and committment many things in life take. Naturally, sacrifices have to be made,
as time is very strictly a finite resource.

As a teenager, I spent a significant portion of my time researching and hacking
away at technical problems which I'd usually discover on my own. It has always
been a passion of mine to solve problems. I think that always has, and will
always continue to be something which is built into my DNA, but it's something
which I get less and less time to pursue as my responsibilities to others
increase.

Over the years, and many people do, I got married and had kids... this changed
the amount of time I'd spend on my hobbies forever. Reading, hacking, and
playing video games, among other things.

One might say that this is part of growing up, and I absolutely agree, but
really, as my children get older, I now have someone to spend time with and
share these hobbies with. I get to watch my children grow up in the world, and
learn more than I've ever known, and I think that is such an exciting thing to
see happen and experience with them.

I've started reading to my children, and realistically, my children are
currently a bit young to properly appreciate it, but I'm finding great enjoyment
in taking the time out to invest in them.

While I have gained other commitments in my life, I'm now able to share the
knowledge which I've learnt over the years with my children. I'm no longer
_just_ a learner, but I'm a teacher, too. While the years of learning and
discovery alone were great, I think the most exciting times remain ahead of me:
teaching my children, and learning new things together.
